# Hi4GS

This program implements a comprehensive framework for feature selection and importance analysis in genomic selection (GS). In modern molecular breeding, the effective screening of high-dimensional SNP data and the identification of interpretable features are critical challenges for improving the accuracy and efficiency of GS. Traditional single feature selection methods often suffer from bias, making it difficult to balance predictive performance with biological interpretability.

The **Hi4GS** package provides a unified and modular toolkit that integrates multiple mainstream feature selection and feature importance evaluation methods, including **abess**, **Boruta**, **Priority LASSO**, **Elastic Net**, **MMPC**, as well as incremental feature selection approaches such as **FIAs** and **FIAs_W**. In addition, **Hi4GS** introduces the population-based intelligent optimization algorithm **P-GWO**, which incorporates a prior matrix into the traditional GWO framework. This enhancement effectively guides the search process in its early stages, reduces randomness, accelerates convergence, and improves solution quality.

For model training, the framework supports cross-validation and multi-metric evaluation, and it is deeply integrated with **mlr3** and **BWGS**, enabling performance comparisons between statistical models and machine learning models. By providing functionalities such as feature union, ranking, and weight optimization, Hi4GS achieves stable, interpretable, and efficient feature selection across datasets of different species and traits.

**Citation** Shanghui Zhang, Mei Song, Jun Zheng, Xianggeng Huang, Xinping Zhang, Ran Qin, Chunhua Zhao, Yongzhen Wu, Han Sun, Guangchen Liu, Feng Chen, Shusong Zheng, Fa Cui, Hi4GS: an interpretable hybrid feature selection framework for genomic selection and application in identifying significant SNPs for wheat yield, 2025,in submiting.


**Suggestions and Problem Feedback** liuguangchen@ldu.edu.cn

---

## Core Functions

The Hi4GS package contains a total of 12 core functions, which include feature selection, model training, and result visualization:

- `auto_abess`: This function performs feature selection with the abess algorithm over a range of support sizes, evaluates models via cross-validation, and identifies the best feature subset based on performance metrics.
- `boruta_regression`: Perform feature selection based on Boruta and then test the performance in random forest.
- `Cluster_priority_lasso`: The block parameters of Priority LASSO are divided by three clustering methods: clara, kmeans, and gmm to improve model performance.
- `feature_union`: Union of Selected Features from Multiple Feature Selection Results.
- `FIAs`: A comprehensive SNP screening approach was implemented by integrating multiple feature importance measures, including mRMR, SNP's PVE, Pearson correlation between SNPs and traits, permutation-based random forest importance, absolute coefficients from ridge regression, and GWAS p-values, in combination with incremental feature selection.
- `FIAs_W`: Weighting the top three FIAs to achieve performance improvement.
- `glmnet_regression`: Performs feature selection using cross-validated elastic net regression (`cv_glmnet`) and evaluates the predictive performance of the selected features using a random forest model (`ranger`) with k-fold cross-validation. The function returns both per-fold performance scores and aggregated performance metrics.
- `gs_bwgs_mlr3`: This function performs genomic selection (GS) by integrating classical statistical methods available in the BWGS package (e.g., GBLUP, Bayesian methods) with flexible machine-learning regression learners from the mlr3 ecosystem. It runs k-fold cross-validation, computes prediction accuracy via Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC), and saves results.
- `gwo_fs`: This function performs feature selection using either the standard Grey Wolf Optimization (GWO) algorithm or a Prior-Guided Grey Wolf Optimization (PGWO) variant. In both cases, each candidate solution ("wolf")is represented as a binary vector indicating selected features.
- `gwo_plot`: gwo_plot() visualizes the performance evolution over iterations for results generated by gwo_fs.It shows the trends of mean R², median R², and maximum R² across generations,allowing users to evaluate the convergence behavior of the Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO) or Priority-Guided Grey Wolf Optimizer (PGWO) in the feature selection process.
- `mmpc_regression`: Applies the MMPC (Max-Min Parents and Children) algorithm for feature selection in a regression context. For each specified value of max_k, it selects features, builds a regression model using ranger, and evaluates performance through cross-validation.
- `rank_fias`: Rank the results of FIAs according to "regr.rsq" and show the top three algorithms and feature rankings.
---

## Getting Started

### 1. Data Preparation

Ensure your genotype and phenotype data are prepared in data frame format.

- **Genotype and phenotypic data (e.g., `WW1768`):**
  - Data frame format, the first column is the target variable (trait value), and the remaining columns are SNP features.
  - The encoding format of these features can be 0, 1, 2 or -1, 0, 1.
- **GWAS phenotyping data (e.g., `gwas.myY`):**
  - A data frame required when using the GWAS algorithm. The first column should contain genotype names, and the second column should contain the trait values.
  - The genotype names in the first column must match the genotype names in the feature column of WW1768.
- **GWAS genotype locus information (e.g., `gwas.myGM`):**  
  - A data frame required when using the GWAS algorithm. 
  - It must have three columns: the first for SNP identifiers, the second for chromosome numbers, and the third for the corresponding physical positions.
- **Example Data Source:** The data used in this project comes from the WW1768 winter wheat dataset.
  - Reference: D.N. Lozada, B.P. Ward, A.H. Carter, Gains through selection for grain yield in a winter wheat breeding program, PLoS One 15 (2020) e0221603.


### 2. R package environment configuration

All required R packages can be installed via:

```bash
cran_packages <- c(
  "remotes", "mlr3learners", "mlr3", "mlr3filters", "mlr3mbo", "mlr3tuning",
  "tidyverse", "writexl", "future", "data.table", "Boruta",
  "abess", "cluster", "mclust", "prioritylasso", "praznik",
  "pryr", "withr")

for(pkg in cran_packages) {
  if(!requireNamespace(pkg, quietly = TRUE)) {
    install.packages(pkg)
  }
}

remotes::install_github("mlr-org/mlr3extralearners")
remotes::install_github("mensxmachina/MXM-R-Package")
remotes::install_github("jiabowang/GAPIT")
```
## How to Use

The Hi4GS function package contains 12 functions, covering FIA, DQA, GWO/P-GWO feature algorithms, GS model training and other functions. The following lists the specific usage of the functions:

### FIAs related functions

1. FIAs

This function performs feature selection by combining multiple feature importance algorithms and incremental feature selection (IFS).
First, features are ranked by importance using the specified algorithms.
Next, features are incrementally added into the predictive model (random forest by default) in order of their importance.
The model performance (evaluated via rsq) is tracked across 1:n_features, and the feature subset achieving the maximum rsq is selected as the final set of informative SNPs.

   ```r
   # Running the Feature Importance Algorithms with Incremental Feature Selection
   FIAs_result <- FIAs(
     data = WW1768,
     gwas.myY = gwas.myY,
     gwas.myGM = gwas.myGM,
     n_folds = 10,
     n_features = 500,
     ridge.lambda = 1:300,
     algorithms = c("mrmr", "PVE", "Cor", "RF", "ridge", "gwas")
    )
   ```
   
2. FIAs_W

This function enhances feature selection by weighting the top three feature importance algorithms (FIAs) obtained from FIAs(). It dynamically combines their rankings using varying weights within a specified range, evaluates model performance (R²) via cross-validation for each weight combination on the top features up to \code{top_n}, and selects the optimal weights that maximize predictive accuracy. Subsequently, incremental feature selection (IFS) is conducted on the weighted ranking to determine the final informative feature subset. The output includes optimal weights, performance metrics, feature rankings, runtime, and memory usage.

   ```r
   FIAs_result <- FIAs(
     data = WW1768,
     gwas.myY = gwas.myY,
     gwas.myGM = gwas.myGM,
     n_folds = 10,
     n_features = 500,
     ridge.lambda = 1:300,
     algorithms = c("mrmr", "PVE", "Cor", "RF", "ridge", "gwas")
   )
   FIAs_W_result <- FIAs_W(data = FIAs_result,weight_step = 0.1)
   ```

3. rank_fias

This function takes the output list from `FIAs()` or `FIAs_W()`, which contains the results of multiple feature selection algorithms evaluated on regression tasks.
It ranks these algorithms based on their maximum cross-validated R² values ("regr.rsq"), then extracts and summarizes the top three algorithms in terms of prediction performance.

   ```r
   FIAs_result <- FIAs(
     data = WW1768,
     gwas.myY = gwas.myY,
     gwas.myGM = gwas.myGM,
     n_folds = 10,
     n_features = 500,
     ridge.lambda = 1:300,
     algorithms = c("mrmr", "PVE", "Cor", "RF", "ridge", "gwas")
   )
   rank_fias(data = FIAs_result)
   
   FIAs_W_result <- FIAs_W(data = FIAs_result,weight_step = 0.1)
   rank_fias(data = FIAs_W_result)
   ```

### DQAs related functions

1. auto_abess

This function automates the feature selection process by iteratively applying ABESS with increasing support sizes (the number of selected features). At each iteration, it fits an ABESS model with the specified **support.size** (equal to **current_k**), and evaluates the selected feature subset by training a random forest regression model with cross-validation using **n_folds** folds.

   ```r
   # starting with 1 feature, increasing by 1 each iteration, up to 5 attempts, with verbose output enabled.
   abess_result <- auto_abess(data = WW1768,start_k = 1,step = 1,max_tries = 5,verbose = TRUE)
   ```

2. boruta_regression

Boruta is a wrapper-based feature selection algorithm built around random forests. It iteratively compares the importance of original features with importance achievable at random (shadow features) to robustly identify truly relevant variables.

   ```r
   # Run Boruta-based feature selection and evaluate with 10-fold CV
   Boruta_result <- boruta_regression(data = WW1768, n_folds = 10, maxRuns = 200, seed = 1)
   ```

3. Cluster_priority_lasso

Priority LASSO is a feature selection method designed for situations where features can be divided into meaningful blocks with a predefined priority order.
It performs block-wise LASSO penalization: features in higher-priority blocks are entered into the model first, while lower-priority blocks are penalized more heavily.
This approach is especially useful in high-dimensional settings such as genomics, where the number of features **p**) greatly exceeds the number of samples (**n**).

   ```r
   PL_result <- Cluster_priority_lasso(
   data = WW1768,
   cluster_methods = c("clara", "kmeans", "gmm"),
   k_values = 2:5,
   clara.samples = 5,
   seed = 1,
   n_folds = 5,
   output_file = "Cluster_priority_lasso.xlsx"
   )
   ```

4. glmnet_regression

The elastic net algorithm is a regularized regression technique that integrates L1 (Lasso) and L2 (Ridge) penalties to simultaneously perform variable selection and coefficient shrinkage. By tuning the mixing parameter alpha, elastic net effectively handles correlated predictors and selects groups of related features, addressing limitations of using Lasso or Ridge alone. The optimal regularization parameter lambda is chosen through cross-validation to minimize prediction error.
This function first applies cross-validated elastic net regression (using the `cv_glmnet` filter from `mlr3`) to score and identify informative SNP features predictive of the target trait. Selected features are then used to build a random forest regression model (`ranger`), which undergoes k-fold cross-validation to evaluate predictive performance with multiple metrics such as R-squared, MSE, RMSE, and bias.
The process also tracks execution time and memory consumption. Results—including per-fold scores, aggregated metrics, and the final set of selected features—are saved to an Excel file to facilitate result interpretation and reproducibility. By combining elastic net’s sparse, robust feature selection with random forest’s nonlinear modeling capability, this workflow provides an efficient and reliable framework for SNP selection and evaluation in genomic prediction.

   ```r
   EN_result <- glmnet_regression(data = WW1768,seed = 1,n_folds = 10)
   ```

5. mmpc_regression

The MMPC (Max-Min Parents and Children) algorithm is a constraint-based feature selection method
that identifies relevant variables by iteratively testing conditional independencies,
aiming to find the direct causes and effects (parents and children) of a target variable.
The parameter max_k controls the maximum size of the conditioning set in these tests,
allowing the detection of increasingly complex dependency structures as max_k increases,
at the cost of greater computational time.

This function applies MMPC for feature selection across a range of max_k values.
For each max_k, it selects relevant features from the input dataset,
then fits a random forest regression model using ranger on the selected features.
The model's predictive performance is evaluated by k-fold cross-validation according to multiple metrics.

   ```r
   mmpc_result <- mmpc_regression(data = WW1768, n_folds = 10,max_k_range = 1:10,threshold = 0.05,seed = 1)
   ```
   
### feature_union()

Union of Selected Features from Multiple Feature Selection Results

   ```r
   #You can select any combination of results to construct a feature union.
   #Uses some results to construct a union (excluding FIAs).
   union1 <- feature_union(FIAs_W_result$results$FIAs_W,abess_result,Boruta_result,PL_result,EN_result,mmpc_result,data = WW1768)
   #Uses all results to construct a union.
   union2 <- feature_union(FIAs_W_result,abess_result,Boruta_result,PL_result,EN_result,mmpc_result,data = WW1768)
   ```
   
### GWO/P-GWO()

1. gwo_fs

This function performs feature selection using either the standard Grey Wolf Optimization (GWO) algorithm
or a Prior-Guided Grey Wolf Optimization (PGWO) variant. In both cases, each candidate solution ("wolf")
is represented as a binary vector indicating selected features.

   ```r
   # Standard GWO (random initialization)
   union <- feature_union(FIAs_W_result$results$FIAs_W, abess_result, Boruta_result, PL_result, EN_result, mmpc_result,data = WW1768)
   feature_union <- union$union_features
  
   GWO_result <- gwo_fs(
     data = WW1768,
     feature_cols = feature_union,
     seed = 1,
     control = list(numPopulation = 10, maxIter = 20, elite = 1),
     output_file = "GWO.csv"
   )
  
   # Prior-Guided GWO (PGWO) with prior knowledge matrix
   Prior_matrix <- union$Prior_Guided_matrix
  
   PGWO_result <- gwo_fs(
     data = WW1768,
     feature_cols = feature_union,
     seed = 1,
     control = list(numPopulation = 10, maxIter = 20, elite = 1, suggestions = Prior_matrix),
     output_file = "PGWO.csv"
   )
   ```

2. gwo_plot

Plot the performance evolution of GWO/PGWO feature selection

   ```r
   union <- feature_union(FIAs_W_result$results$FIAs_W,abess_result,Boruta_result,PL_result,EN_result,mmpc_result,data = WW1768)
   feature_union <- union$union_features
   GWO_result <- gwo_fs(
     data = WW1768,
     feature_cols = feature_union,
     seed = 1,
     control = list(numPopulation = 10, maxIter = 20, elite = 1),
     output_file = "GWO.csv"
   )
   
   gwo_plot(GWO_result)
   ```

### gs_bwgs_mlr3

This function performs genomic selection (GS) by integrating classical statistical methods available in the **BWGS** package
(e.g., GBLUP, Bayesian methods) with flexible machine-learning regression learners from the **mlr3** ecosystem.
It runs k-fold cross-validation, computes prediction accuracy via Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC), and saves results.
   
   ```r
   # Run Genomic Selection with BWGS and mlr3
   Hi4GS.data <- WW1768 %>% select(1,PGWO_result$feature_selection)
   gs_results <- gs_bwgs_mlr3(
     data = Hi4GS.data,
     methods = c("GBLUP","regr.ranger"),
     seed = 1,
     n_folds = 10,
     output_file = "gs_results.xlsx"
   )
   
   # Access average PCC per method
   gs_results$avg_pcc
   
   # Inspect predictions for a specific method
   gs_results$raw_data[[1]]
   ```   
   

